Since I probably
didn't answer many of them, which I apologize for,
I really should know the history of the city
better, but quite often what we wind up with in the
planning is you're so busy trying to... stay where
you are that you don't have too much time to worry
about the history and tradition uh galveston
though does have a strong sense of history and i
don't mean to imply people aren't aware of it the
strand redevelopment uh venturi and rosh did a
plan for it won a progressive architecture award
while i was there using municipal data the only
thing they added to the plan was 1975
was the award. They did the work in 74. The only
thing they added to city data and design work that
had been done to that point was that they came up
with a color scheme and some sketches of what the
street ought to look like. But the city parking
analysis, planning analysis, land use,
everything, population, commercial
opportunities, linkages, it had all been laid out
by the city staff. Which is typical of a lot of
consultants, you know, and that's okay, it was a
good plan. They just put the spinach on it. You
know, they put the spinach on it and put it into a
nice package so it looked good and tracked the
attention. They got their fee. They got their fee
and left town. But, you know, that's alright, we
need people like that, yes. There's a historic
district that has attracted a great deal of
interest in the East End that has renovated what
was really a decaying ghetto and slum to that
point. It became very popular. While I was there,
we established a second historic district called
Central District that was kind of toward the
seawall west of downtown. Very fine old houses.
Marvelous. It's one of the greatest collection of
19th century Victorian architecture that you'll
find. The Strand has got perhaps the greatest
collection of commercial Victorian businesses
that you'll find. Cast iron storefronts bought to
order from the east coast and bolted onto the
building. Instant architecture. the best the
world has to offer. At that time. At that time. It
was far more sophisticated than Houston. Oh,
yeah. And the outcome, of course, was that you have
a series of mansions in Galveston that even by
today's standards are perhaps some of the
greatest pieces of architecture that you can
find. And certain foremost examples, Bishop's
Palace is a marvelous example. Okay.
Let's go through the list here to see if there's
anything we can pick up. Well, do you know when the
city first established the planning department
as such? Do you have any ideas? I don't know when it
was established, per se, as such. I would say that
if they had a planning commission established
under the 61 charter, it would only be logical that
a planning department to provide staff
assistance to that commission would also have
existed at that stage. It's kind of an inescapable
conclusion. Now, it may have well been a city
engineer or a planning inspector that was doing,
or a department or building inspector doing the
work, but I really don't know beyond that. If they
had a planning staff persuade before that, it
would have somewhat surprised me. Was there any
relationship with citizen groups? Oh geez. A and
B, what was the relationship between the planning
department and the city council? There was
tremendous relationships between citizens
groups, extremely strong special interest
groups in the community, neighborhood
associations, historic associations, cultural
societies, Almost any three people that got
together had a common ax to grind. And part of it was
the frustration of not having a city that was
responsive. You couldn't get the staff to answer a
question. You know, who put up the bicycle pathway
signs? And half the city staff would refuse to
answer for fear they would get somebody in
trouble. And it turns out the guy wants to
compliment the city on establishing a bicycle
pathway, even though it may not be one of the most
advanced designs. You know, the more, here are
some lines and markings, and let it go with that. In
many ways, the city staff reminisces very much
about what it was like under the commissioner
system, and you had to watch your step. There was no
civil service protection. You made a mistake, you
were canned immediately, and everything was
political, and it was a very corrupt city. It was
wide open gambling, mafioso, and you'd wind up in
the bay if you weren't careful. And part of all of
this was part of that 61 reform package to try to get
some of that cleaned up. And some of the mansions
those people lived in are still there, you know,
the criminal elements. There's still a lot of
gambling and prostitution. I shouldn't say it,
but I'm absolutely convinced the police
department, many elements of the police
department was still on the take when I was there.
Corruption in many aspects was pretty darn
rampant, and it was kind of hard to get that image
snapped out. The citizens absolutely
were adamant. They were active. There was good
community organization. We tended to support it
because people that were active and citizens
tended to support the kind of things that we
thought needed to be done, too. And I'll be honest
with you, a lot of them were just absolute pains in
terms of the planning staff and department. They
would pick us, you know, okay, you've got to put up
with them for a while. We would put up with them for a
while. They would call us and report things. We'd
be sitting there trying to ramp up a grant
application for $500,000, and they're screaming
because somebody's putting up a chain-link fence
in a historic district without any building
permits. We'd have to drop that and try to get
somebody out there to respond to it and red-tag it.
and catch the guy that's doing business, you know,
and so forth. And, you know, it's difficult
working with people. They don't understand all
the time why you don't respond immediately or to
their satisfaction, particularly when there's a
conflicting interest, you know, and you're kind
of caught in the middle and there's a judge saying,
well, we know why you're seeing that, but we don't
have any legal basis or authority to act. So that's
a problem. The planning staff's relationship
with the city council was interesting. All city
staffs would be drug into the city council
chamber, particularly directors on occasion.
And it's a very complex thing in its personality
more than anything else. If the city council had
respect for the staff and thought they were
competent, They would tend to listen and treat
them as professionals. They also tended to treat
most of the staff as being incompetent and not
being professionals. The general feeling was, as
left over from the commission days and the poor
salaries, was that anybody that worked for
Galveston obviously couldn't be that good. If
they were any good, they would be gone within a
short time, so there was no real point in doing much
more than using them to your maximum within the
short term. This is a common problem I think all
cities have. If you're really going to get it, why
are we working for us? And it permeates all levels
of government. So that's a real problem. On the
other hand, it's very obvious that they attract
good attention and got things done and they notice
things. But there was a lot of reasons that they
should think many of the city staff were
incompetent, because in fact they were. We had a
city attorney, who I won't name now, who had come
fresh out of law school and gotten a job as the third
assistant city attorney, junior, bottom of the
line. And he kind of stayed there. Well, of course,
attorneys traditionally always get paid a little
bit more, and that's the way they make connections
within a community so they can go set up their own
practice. You know, you win your spurs and win a few
cases and get a reputation, and you go from there.
Well, the outcome of all of that was that you're
facing a situation where in most law schools, they
don't teach much about municipal law. They don't
teach much about planning or land use law. There's
no money in it. You know, why bother? Nobody in his
right mind is going to do that other than worrying
about the bonds and the financial aspects. Well,
this guy, because he stayed there for a long period
of time, kept getting promoted. The guy above him
quits and gets a good job, and he moves up. Well, it
got interesting because it got to the point that I
was going downstairs, borrowing his law library,
looking things up, and then carrying the open
volumes into him to talk to him about what we were
getting ready to do and why we could do it.
It also got to the point that He would get put on the
spot and make some very bad mistakes. There's an
incorporated village on Gallaston Island called
Jamaica Beach. It is there because he made a wrong
decision on the spot in the city council chamber.
The mayor, who was a lawyer, said, are you sure you
can do that? And he said, well, yes, I'm convinced
that if they want to withdraw their application
that the clock would stop. that doesn't
necessarily hold so. What they were saying is we
would like more time to negotiate, and the clock on
us incorporating within your extraterritorial
jurisdiction certainly does not stop unless we
efficiently remove the application. So the
result is Jamaica Beach is the only incorporated
city on Galveston Island except Galveston. The
lawyer was told by the mayor, are you absolutely
sure? You take all the time you want, because if
you're wrong, it will be the last decision and
advice you ever give to this council.
He's no longer there. And it was deemed to be just a
total disaster from the standpoint of the city.
And from a planning standpoint, it's utterly a
disaster. It's like creating a 450-unit
subdivision in the middle of downtown Austin. You
know, with an independent police force on Tylan
Park and University Park all over again, with
totally incompetent and incapable of putting on a
smaller schedule. Yeah, on a smaller schedule.
Which makes it less viable. Yeah. And with all the
same physical problems and constraints the city
of Galveston as a whole had, but without any city
staff or assistance or professional tax base to be
able to do any work, which meant they tried to wing
everything.
Oh, right.
How is the department itself organized? Is there
any specific formal organization in the planning
department, would you say? Oh, yeah. Every
bureaucracy has got to have a formal
organization. At the time I was there, it might
almost be easier to sketch out
trying to explain it, but essentially. We can do
that after the interview. Alright.
Have there been any fairs or expositions that you
remember in or where I'm in Galveston that might
have affected the planning? I'm not sure. Oh, like
county fairs or trade expositions? or major
conventions or something
like that? Not that I know of, but let me say that
Galveston historically was a resort city, and
there were probably some things that happened
prior to 1950 particularly that may have been very
influential not only for Galveston, but the state
as a whole. Today, the convention center in
Galveston is a very small, inadequate facility,
simply based upon inadequate land capacity. The
hotel availability is quite limited. I don't
think you're going to see anything very large
scale there, simply because of the
lack of facility availability. I'm sorry. You're
going. Several things that I think we ought to
touch on. First of all, This is well before you were
there, of course, but you might have heard quite a
bit about it, the Houston Ship Channel and the
impact that had on the development of the island
and also the railroad's impact on
the development of the island. Sure. No problem at
all. Also, we just mentioned the fact that
conventions were a problem for Galveston because
of capacity for motel rooms and so forth. I think
I'd like to point out that another problem with
Galveston in terms of conventions is that there is
no airport servicing that is convenient for...
Well, there is an airport in Galveston. I know, but
it's not convenient for convention areas. Yeah. I
don't know what service they have in there now, but
there was a subsidiary of... One of the airlines
was flying a commuter in, which they're flying to
Havel and Otters, which maybe 10, 11 people. That
certainly is a problem. Transportation into the
city is a problem. But that's almost an inevitable
situation. The railroads probably provided the
ideal solution for the automobile in that it made
it very accessible. and that's one of the reasons
it's such a popular recreational resort center.
The ship channel to Houston just absolutely
devastated because there's simply no, you know,
with the inadequate berthing space that was
available in Galveston, the fact that it had just
been devastated by a major storm, all combined to
really, you know, create the demise of Galveston
as the premier coastal city. Land was much
cheaper, much more abundantly available all
along the Ship Channel, Texas City, Port Arthur,
all the way into the Ship Channel itself. I don't
think there's any doubt or argument about that.
And on the other hand, some people in Galveston
would argue that was probably the best thing that
ever happened, because otherwise Galveston
would turn out to have looked like Texas City or the
Houston Ship Channel. And it certainly would have
not been the more diverse cultured community that
it is today. So, you know, you can look at it as being
something that was bad that happened from an
economic sense, but on the other sense, it
probably helped the community. Okay, what about
World Wars? Galveston, in its strategic
geographic position, had a pretty important role
to play. You may not be familiar with that, but I
want to bring it up because there are military
bases there yet. During the Second World War, they
had to fight . Well, they had a coastal artillery
position that was established there probably
after the Civil War. And so they had coastal
artillery bunkers and Coast Guard usual
activities like that. At the present time they
have major corps of engineers stationed there and
they have Coast Guard stationed there probably
equivalent of about two or three cutters and some
smaller boats.
In terms of its strategic importance it's
certainly not of the levels say of Norfolk or San
Diego or some of those places because you know it is
removed it's not on the coast it's not where the
action is but on the other hand certainly there was
submarine activity in the gulf and Galveston and
the city and The refineries all provided critical
resources, and from an economic sense and from
basically kind of a submarine patrol sense, it was
important. But I don't think that it was as
important from a national sense other than from
the refinery and the materials and economic
standpoint. That's what made it so important.
No, there's none in Galveston, but it was kind of
the port of entry for the refinery from Texas City
and the ship channel and so forth. Of course,
that's where a lot of casualties came. There were
people being torpedoed out of the Houston Ship
Channel and casualties would be picked up and
brought into UTMB, John Seeley, and it's probably
why some of the Byrne interest and expertise was
developed in the Shriners located at the Byrnes
Institute there.
I think we've covered most of these questions
already, the role of outside consultants
and so forth. Could you sum up what you think to be
the current status of the planning in
Galveston? I would feel very comfortable
surmising where they are at the present time. And
part of the reason being I've had so little direct
contact with people there. I would like to say one
thing more about the consultants. Galveston's
been willing to spend money on consultants, which
I think is a good thing. The city staff there, like
most communities, has really been too small, and
in many cases it hasn't had expertise in
particular things that need to be done, but
they're not something you want somebody on staff
with that expertise to kind of run out of. You know,
you do one building survey, and that's it. You
know, I mean, basically you've got the... what is
it, HABS, Historic American Building Survey, and
the THC does everything. So you get those two done,
they mutually identify the community, and you
don't need to have them back, hopefully, for
another five or 10 years. The same is true in terms
of engineering expertise, transportation,
traffic analysis. A lot of times the community
would have not been able to conduct its standard
affairs and standard planning activities and
made applications for some of these major grants
without having a consultant hired. Whether it's
Bajar Johnson, Wilbur Smith we had working for us
on the transit plan. Bernard Johnson's done some
things. Martin Sprengler's done some things. You
know, we've had some firms that, you know,
occasionally we snicker and laugh about because
you pick up the plan and say, hey, this is just like
the one Marvin did in Port Arthur and Beaumont. You
know, you see the same colors, the same press tape,
you know, and the same format. And you can tell
which community spent more because there's more
to the ones that spent more. But in reality, those
consultants are vital. You cannot adequately do a
good job without them. And it would be expensive
trying to keep those kind of people, those skills
on staff year-round. Okay. Let's take a look at
some of these influences on planning process in
Galveston. You talked about political
influences. What about religion? Has religion
played any, has it impacted the planning process
at all? If not, we just want to know. I would say yes.
It's quite a Catholic. It's very heavily
Catholic. There's a large Jewish population.
It's got an Eastern Orthodox Church. As a matter of
fact, it's a very Catholic community. The
Catholics have established an extensive
parochial school system in the community. At the
time, there were something like four Catholic
high schools operating at one point. A lot of them
have been consolidated and phased down to just
junior high. and so forth. Interestingly enough,
there's a very large black Catholic population in
Galveston, which you don't find in most
communities. So it's not so much a matter of trying
to maintain a segregated school system, Religion
does play a dominant role. There's a lot of
Catholic churches. There's way too many for its
population size and the number of Catholics. Part
of it was the historical development. You get
these older cities that develop in a very dense
pattern. People tend to walk or ride a carriage,
and they don't go 5 and 10 miles to go to church. But
has religion had such impact in planning?
We're talking about religion here by itself, but
has there been any causal relationship between
the two? I'm not sure what you mean by causal
relationship. I would say one thing, and that is,
Bob, that what you've got is you have a lot of people
of certain religious persuasions and categories
that have informal and formal connections. You
get a city councilman that is Jewish or Methodist
or whatever, he's going to have contacts because
of that religious association. And that creates a
very kind of sophisticated social web and network
that makes certain things a little bit more
responsive or less possible than would have been
otherwise. The only building within the Central
Historic District that was excluded from the
historic district regulations, that is
exempted, you know, you've got this one lot
sitting there in the middle of the district, was
the Jewish synagogue. And part of it was because of
these kinds of connections. So yeah, there is some
causal influence, but it's not that direct. You
know, it's not something like the Catholics are
out to see a particular form of development or
pattern occur. As much as it is, it creates a social
framework within which decisions are made and
special considerations are taken of certain
individuals. Okay, very good. Now, what about
ethnic impacts on the planning process? Oh,
tremendous. large Spanish population, large
black population, virtually every country out of
the Mediterranean you can name. It's a coastal
city, seaport, you've got lots of Portuguese,
Spanish, Italians, Greeks, and these people in
some cases have become very influential. For
example, dear old George Mitchell, A&M alumni,
and it's Greek. and he's had a tremendous impact on
Galveston coastal development. He's playing
with the computer next door.
So, yeah, there's a lot of ethnic input.
Furthermore, the feds have mandated that
minorities be taken into account and special
consideration be given to the province. Could you
give us an example of how a particular ethnic group
has impacted the planning process?
Basically, if you look at, say, the lower income
groups that would need to be serviced and the way
they're supposed to spend money. You're loud
today, Wayne.
Yes. And so the outcome is that the way physical
developments are funded through, say, community
development block grants, the way bus routes are
laid out, the way decisions are made about which
school to close or not to close or renovate, all
tend to be considered in terms of their impact on
various ethnic and racial groups. It's a factor
within the decision and planning process. And if
it is not clearly reflected in terms of the
outcome, you're endangering a lot of your funding
processes. And that's something that when I was
there, we were very concerned about. We made
decisions. based upon how things were going to
look to federal reviewing agencies or to courts if
we got drug into court.
Okay, very good. I think that covers it very well.
The next impact, of course, is geographic. And
that one could say a lot about, to be honest, this
geographic impact on the planning process. Well,
let's just start back in 1830-something. If you
look at the population growth of the city of
Galveston from the state of Texas, Republic of
Texas, when it was first being founded, people
tended to migrate in from Arkansas and Louisiana
from the east. The frontier at the time of the
founding of the Republic was Austin. We still had
Indian massacres occurring right out here at
Barton Springs. 1836, 1840, occasionally have
Cheyenne War Party penetrate into down below San
Marcos and right into East Texas before they were
being chased out. So the whole population
movement of the state was essentially
from the east, and this immediately said, okay,
what is the transportation route that you are
logically going to try to find in terms of bringing
goods and commodities in? Well, it so happened,
technologically, there was no decent way of
moving anything except by water, particularly
bulk commodities and cargoes. Man, it was slow and
hard going to try to have any kind of cart or wagon.
There were no roads. And so immediately you begin
to look at the coast in terms of potential river
relationships and navigation. Now, it so
happened the only decent natural harbor in the
state of Texas is Galveston. It is the only one.
Every other one has got serious swamps. There's a
lot wrong with Galveston. But it's better than
anything else on this side of New Orleans, going
all the way down through Mexico. There are
problems with Corpus and Brownsville, which are
the only other two natural decent harbors on the
coast. Specifically, what are they going to
service? Nothing. And Alveston tended to have
good river relationships. He could go up the
Trinity, he could go down to the end of the island,
go up the Brazos, and he'd get all the way to Waco on
occasion. Jerusalem on the Brazos, right. The
outcome is that Galveston became the natural
economic center of Port City simply because of its
transportation relationships.
Traditionally, the limit to navigation on the
Brazos most of the year was Millikan. Y'all
remember Millikan? You heard this story before?
Okay. um and so Galveston became the premier city
because this is where all the change of
commodities and transportation techniques
river boats to oceans schooners to and then when
the railroad got built they were building the
railroad that got as far as Milken they stopped
building it because in 1961 the civil war happened
they couldn't get any steel for rails well Milken
Anyway, so the outcome was they got as far as
Milliken, and that's where the change in
transportation again occurred, you know, back
over to ox carts and wagons. So basically all of the
commerce of the inland area and developed area of
Texas for years and years came through Galveston.
The railroads tended to reinforce that pattern.
Water relationships reinforced that pattern,
all because of the natural harbor. Now there was a
sandbar out there, but still it was the smallest
sandbar that you could find on any of these rivers,
because this was the largest flow coming in. So the
geographic pattern was, gee, you come around, you
go to the backside of the island, nice and smooth,
you drive a few piers in, you have the Strand, which
is in fact a commercial street, and the back of all
those stores are warehouses, and all kinds of
wonderful things happen economically. That's
the reason Galveston was there, and that's the
reason it was developed. And when technology
changed that pattern, you know, we got a new ship
channel, and we became a little bit less rail
dependent, and the population shift kind of moved
around, Galveston began to lose itself,
particularly because of its rather hazardous
exposed position to the Gulf in terms of storms.
The natural elevation of Galveston Island is
about 12 to 14 foot. The 100-year flood elevation
is 12 feet. The island will go completely
underwater. In response to that, they built the
seawall. The seawall will probably fail someday.
works so far but the way the seawall works is that it
keeps the waves running through the island
destroying buildings and all the water seeps
around the seawall and backs in from the bay and
puts all the entire island under water except for
the top of the seawall well but that way all you have
is wind you don't have the destructive force of the
waves which is tremendous in terms of energy
levels And all of your buildings tend to be built up
on pilings, pretty much. Almost every building in
town, you either walk up to get in, or it's built up
on telephone poles with the hope that the water
gets underneath and damages the garage and the
car, but at least it doesn't wipe out your
building. Have there been any minimum elevation
requirements for construction caused by
geographic factors?
The city adopted a 10-foot elevation
requirement, and I can't remember the exact
history on it now at one point, for residential
purposes only. This was, I think, a response to the
161 storm.